---
date: 2020-11-29T00:49:51.000+00:00
layout: post
comments: true
title: Us versus Them
main_content: Why we hate each other and where do we go from here?
tags:
- Heal
- Unity
- 'Tribalism '
author: Grant May
image: "/uploads/profile-picture.JPG"
tags:
- Tribalism
- Unity
- Heal

---
“As traditional tribes of place evaporate, we rally against common enemies so we can feel part of a team. No institutions command widespread public trust, enabling foreign intelligence agencies to use technology to pick the scabs on our toxic divisions. We’re in danger of half of us believing different facts from the other half, and the digital revolution throws fuel on the fire.” Thus begins Ben Sasse’s book Them: Why We Hate Each Other and How To Heal. While I don't agree with everything Senator Sasse states in his book, I completely agree with him that we have reached a scary point in American politics. People are now willing to say and do things to those they deem their political enemy that decades before would have been unthinkable. There are two key factors contributing to this tribalist mentality: the erosion of our social fabric and the inability to have respectful conversations with members on the other side of the aisle.

The first factor helping to create a toxic political divide is the erosion of our social fabric. America is unique and it always has been unique. She has had her fair share of problems and challenges, but one thing that has almost always been true is Americans were on this crazy ride together. Throughout American history, social institutions played a vital role in the lives of Americans. From church to boy scouts; choir to bowling club, Americans have valued social interaction and the art of being neighborly. It was common to know most people who lived in your town or neighborhood and to check in on them and talk to them. However around the age of information and globalization, a new style of living crept into American life. The great Francis Schaeffer called this the “age of personal peace and affluence”. Materialism and apathy slowly captured the hearts of many Americans and these social institutions started to crumble. Fewer and fewer Americans participated in the social functions that made America unique. This meant less and less social interaction and more and more selfishness. Less interaction with people who are different than us allowed us to surround ourselves with like minded individuals, creating an echo chamber. Americans no longer participated in events where they would have to talk with people of different beliefs than themselves. This creates a lack of understanding for ideological opponents and creates an us versus them mentality. When you cannot admit wrong on your side but are willing to point out the wrong of your opponents all day, you have reached a point where cooperation and unity are difficult to find.

The second factor helping to create a toxic political divide is the inability to have respectful conversations with members on the other side of the aisle. Once our social institutions crumbled, one was less likely to have conversation with those of opposing viewpoints. These conversations, which were once so vital to the American way of life, were no longer happening. Most Americans simply tried to ignore political differences and not bring them up. They believed an anti confrontational approach would be best. While it does not make enemies, avoiding hard topics won't get anyone anywhere. By avoiding discussing truth, some Americans feed the lie that there can be many truths. Others however, eager for confrontation, seek not to have respectful, constructive conversations, but they rather prefer to try and “score points” for their ideological tribe. Instead of walking into a conversation ready to learn and reconcile beliefs, they approach their ideological enemy ready to do war. Some of those seeking confrontation do use actual arguments and logic, but they do not approach the conversation with humility; others however, for fear of being annihilated in an ideological warfare choose to not argue their policy platform and ideas but rather their opponents character. They choose to smear and defame the character of who they perceive to be their opponent. If they can make others believe that they are a bad person, they no longer have to deal with the ideas of their opponent. The digital revolution increased this problem exponentially. Before when making a character argument, one would be responsible for the words they said; however, now anyone can take to the internet, hide behind a fake name, and assassinate the character of their ideological opponent. Hiding behind a screen emboldens cowards from every basement across the nation to say things that would never be said if we were actually having conversations in person.

In conclusion, there are two key factors contributing to the tribalism mentality: the erosion of our social fabric and the inability to have respectful conversations with members on the other side of the aisle. Now that we have arrived at this point, the obvious question remains: where do we go from here. The way I see it, we have two options: continue down this road where we do not befriend those with opposing beliefs and seek instead to destroy them, or we can back track. We can turn around and realize that maybe we didn't have this whole thing right. Maybe it is worth sometimes being told we are wrong and walking away with the truth than always being right. Maybe it is worth passing up the opportunity to humiliate someone based on their beliefs and instead show them the truth with kindness. Maybe we can start investing in unique American institutions again. Maybe we can focus less on the labels that divide us and more on the ones that unite us. After all, we are all Americans.